# The Unidirectionality of Human Thought

I have been thinking about a problem: how do we let an artificial intelligence know the natural numbers, which is the most fundamental concept in mathematics. We can simplify this question with two sub-questions: a. How to let an AI know the successor of a given number and b. How to let it know the predecessor of a given number.

This is a quite tricky question because it is difficult to abstract the concept of successor and predecessor. Human can easily tell the successor of 5 is 6, and the predecessor of 5 is 4. So there are two inputs for each question: a number, and a transforming command, which is "successor" or "predecessor". It takes no effort when it comes to programming, but if we will probably fall into silence when being asked: How do we let the AI learn the concept of "successor" and "predecessor" if it hasn't grasp the basic mathematical concept——counting——in the first place? Or then, we can ask ourselves if we were aware of these two concepts when we were able to count, and the answer is definitely no, unless you were a prodigy, or a reincarnated person with memories of past lives.

It turns out that learning should be based on a more simple and intuitive process, which enables a baby to get into their first lesson. The other day an idea suddenly came into my mind: what if the information in our brains is stored one-way, and we can only think of "the next" instead of "the previous". If so, the digits in our mind are stored like a singly linked list, "1 -> 2 -> 3 -> ... -> 9", so that when a digit comes into our mind, the next digit will come immediately after. Well, but we can easily tell the digit before a digit easily, aren't we? Yes, but let me explain it further with more examples.

The first example is alphabet. In the case of not reciting the alphabet from the beginning, can you tell the letter after "U"? It is "V", very easy. But what about the letter before it? Most people don't memorize the alphabet backwards, so that they cannot quickly tell the letter before a letter, compared to the letter after it. If you are able to do this and you don't have the backward alphabet in your mind, the only possibility is that a clear enough image is in your mind, from which you "see" the letter before "U", but this involves photographic memory and uses another functionality of our brain, which works in a totally different way.

The second example is poems. When I was in high school, we were required to memorize many ancient poems, and classmates often tested one another. And all of us discovered an interesting pattern: answering the "next sentence" is always easier than answering the "previous sentence". When people were asked the previous sentence, they usually started from the beginning, that is, the title of the poem. But sometimes we forgot the title, so the question is converted into a new question: what is the title of the poem containing such sentence?

The two examples provides some pieces of evidence that when human beings recall things, we are not able to retrieve our memory backwards. But at most, this is only indirect evidence. The direct evidence comes from the neural structure. When a neuron is activated, the electrical signal is transmitted to the end of the cell, the axon, where neurotransmitters are passed through the synapse to the dendrites of the next connected neuron, activating it. This process is strictly one-way, meaning neurotransmitters cannot travel through the same synapse to pass from the dendrites to the axon.

Now, let's go back and explain why we can tell the predecessor of a digit immediately. The reason is that we are using decimal digits every day, so we already build connections between these digits. If you start to learn a new language and just be able to count from 0 to 9, you will find that telling the previous number is still difficult, and you may probably count from 0 again all the way to the target number to relieve the pain.

Furthermore, straight A students who have done a pile of arithmetic practice sets, can give the answer of "25 - 9", or even harder, "16 x 9" in a flash. That's because they already build up sequences like "25 -> (-) -> 9 -> 16", and "16 -> (x) -> 9 -> 144", which already becomes part of their memory.

However, there is one thing that I still cannot get my head around. Artificial neural networks (ANN) does the machine learning part using the backpropagation technique, which updates the weight matrices backwards using gradient descent or other algorithms. But this definitely not how our brains work, since neurons in our brains cannot communicate with previous neurons through the same synapse biologically, as mentioned before. But I would save this for later because this is not the focus of this article.

---

After discovering that human thinks unidirectionally, we can conjecture and draft possible explanations for some phenomena.

When learning and analyzing this world, people always pair and connect events by saying one is the cause of another, which is the effect. The cause-effect system roots in everyone's mind, and often time it helps me to speculate many things, enabling us to avoid dangers and risks in our lives. Later we learn to build logical chains by letting an effect be the cause of another causation, which sometimes ends up to the known avalanche effect.

But the avalanche effect is already a niche, and there is a more important thing we need to ponder behind this. A logical chain is just like the ordered natural numbers, or an alphabet, people are easily to move from a cause to an effect, but harder to move backwards. This is often referred to as "cognitive inertia". Therefore, when listening to a piece of information, we can effortlessly tell the effects based on it, but need to take some time think about the cause, which consumes more brain energy, making us more reluctant to do. If there suddenly appears a person who tells you the cause to the effect, we tend to accept their plausible idea, which seems take a lot of time to deduct, but generally unreliable.

So, how to overcome this? Recall the way we learn to count natural numbers backwards——we simply memorize a reversal sequence. Similarly, we can intentionally strengthen our memory by keeping reversal logic chains by heart. In fact, we automatically do this when we contemplate deeply, in a tranquil night, listening to relaxing music, and with eyes closed. And sometimes, we also need to tidy up our mind by recollecting and reorganizing the clutter causations. As Confucius said: "By reviewing what you have learned, and learning new things from it, you can become a teacher. (温故而知新，可以为师矣。)"

I came up about this because the other day I was debating with my friend on a social issues. A country, denoted as C, was exposed a piece of news about using oil tankers to transport cooking oil. My friend believed that the inadequacy of government regulation led to the astonishing event. I agreed with him on this part, but we split on the next part: "the relevant regulatory authorities take taxpayers' money but do nothing".

I then asked him how could he draw this conclusion, and his logic was: "If they did conduct spot checks carefully, then this event could not happen." It seems to be logically hold, but the premise is not sufficient in the real world. I then asked him: "Did you check out how many spot checks they conducted last year? Those reports are open to the public." As the saying goes: "Good news travels slowly, bad news has wings." Public barely pay attention to the positive new, but they let scandals go viral. For a big country with large population, having some scandals on food safety is common, in terms of probability.

Even so, I also didn't have enough evidence to tell that relevant regulatory authorities did generally a great job, but their reputation was suddenly destroyed by such an event. But what I want to point out with this example is, when considering the causes of an effect, we should think more possibilities, and keep them in mind for future use. If we accept others' derivation results without doubt and thinking, both our emotions and reasoning will be led around by the nose.
